# OOLanguageComparison Project
Members:
- Jared Zeman

Languages: 
- C#
- C++

### Language purpose/genesis
- Released in 2000 C# was intended to be a modern general purpose language while being portale with its C and C++ predecessors. Often accused of imitating or being a clone of java but its lead architect Hejlsberg has denied this.
- First apeared in 1983 C++ was renamed from C with classes. It was designed as a low level language with classes that went by the philosophy of trusting the programer. It was wanted to let the programer do whatever they wanted.
### Unique features of the language
Not necisarly complete unique currently but features of the language advertised when first released.
- C#
  1. Generics
      >C# will include a type-safe, high-performance version of generics which differs slightly in syntax and greatly in implementation from templates as found in C++ and generics as proposed for the Java language
  2. Iterators
      >An iterator is a language construct based on similar features in research languages such as CLU, Sather and Icon. Simply put, iterators make it easy for types to declare how the foreach statement will iterate over their elements.
  3. Anonymous Methods
      > Anonymous methods are another practical language construct that allows programmers to create code blocks that can be encapsulated in a delegate and executed at a later time. They are based on a language concept called a lambda function and are similar to those found in Lisp and Python.
  4. Partial Types
      > Partial types allow you to break up types consisting of a large amount of source code into several different source files for easier development and maintenance. Furthermore, partial types allow you to separate machine-generated and user-written parts of your types so that it is easier to supplement or modify code generated by a tool.
 - C++
   1. Classes
       > Allows you to create defined data types and leads to several other features
   2. Inheritance
       > Can take on propeties of other defined data types
       1. Multiple Inheritance
           >unique among C++ is the ability to directly inherit from multiple classes
   3. Encapsulation
       > Ability to hide data within a structure
   4. hybrid language
       > able act like a oop language and something more akin to C
### Name spaces
- C#
  1. used to define scope
  2. can declare another namespace inside.
 - C++
   1. Used to define a scope for identifiers
   2. typacly declared in the header file
### Types
 - C#
   1. C# supports simple data types like book, int, float, and also data types such as struct
   2. Both refrence and value types are supported
   3. Value types can be created though the struct type
 - C++
   1. By default C++ classes are value types though you can force it to become a refrence type by disable copying
### Classes
 - C#
   1. Classes in C#
     > A class is a data structure that may contain data members (constants and fields), function members (methods, properties, events, indexers, operators, instance constructors, destructors and static constructors), and nested types.
   2. Create a new class
     1. to create a new class a class decleration is used which is an optional attribute, an optional class modifier, an optional partial modifier, the keyword class, an identifier that names the class, an optional type parameter list, an optional base class specification, an optional type constraint clause, a class body, and an optional semicolon
     ```antlr
        partial class Example {
         ...
     }
     ```
   3. Constructing/initializing
     1. to initialize a class the keyword new must be used on the identifier in which case the constructor will be used. The defualt constructor is used unless you create one in the class.
     ```antlr
     new Example();
     ```
   4. Destructing/de-initializing
     1. You can free memory taken by an instance by implementing destructors in C#
     
 - C++
   1. A class in C++ is a blueprint for a data type
   2. It is created by using the keyword "class" followed by a identifier then a body ended by either a semicolon or a list of declarations.
     ```antlr
     class Example
     {
     ...
     }
     ```
   3. initialized by declaring a variable of that class. Uses a constructor if there is one.
     ```antlr
     Example example;
     ```
   4. Deconstructors are created as a method in the class
### Instance reference name in data type
 - C#
   1. "this" is used to refrence the class that you are currently in.
- C#
   1. "this" is a refrence to itself
### Properties
 - C#
   1. getters and setters are implemented in C#
     ```antlr
     public string getterSetter { get; set; }
     ```
   2. backing variables is done automaticly in compile time so
   
       ```antlr
       private string getterSetter;
       public string GetterSetter
       {
          get {return getterSetter;}
          set {getterSetter = setter;}
       }
       ```
       
       is the same as the shorthand example
 - C++
   1. getters and setters must be written
### Interfaces / protocols 
 - C#
   1. C# supports interfaces
   2. C# interfaces can inherit from multiple other interfaceses and be implimented by a class or struct who can impliment multiple interfaceses.
     1. memebers of an interface must be public
   3. An interface is used as a contract that forces those that impliment to adhere to it.
 - C++
   1. Interfaces in C++ are implimented using abstract classes
   2. to be used the abstract class needs to be instantiated and implement all of its functions
   ```antlr
   virtual double example() = 0;
   ```
### Inheritance / extension
 - C#
   1. C# supports inheritance of only one class
   2. extensions are implemented though extension methods. They are made useing a static class in which the class you want to extend is brought into scope with the namespace.
   3. A abstract class is made by declaring one of its functions as pure virtual by setting a function to 0
 - C++
   1. C++ may inherit from multiple classes
   2. C++ does not have extensions and you must create a another class to inherite from or use a factory to have similar capabilities.
### Reflection
 - C#
   1. allows access to a type at runtime
   2. Commonly used to get metadata and to build new types at runtime
 - C++
   1. Used to get metadata
   2. GetType is used for Reflection otherwise it is not implimented in C++
### Memory management
 - C++
   1. garbage collectors exist and are supported but are not inherit in the language
   2. management mostly falls on the programer.
   3. more simple than C as it does the malloc itself
 - C#
   1. has garbage collectors that clean up memory if there is no refrence and a threshold for memory has been passed
### Comparisons of references and values
 - C#
   1. C# == can be used to compare value equality for simple data types. for complex data types the Equal() method is prefered though if both are values compared are explecitly the same type == can still be used. ReferenceEquals() can be used to compare the reference of two objects
 - C++
   1. == is prefered to to compare values.
### Null/nil references 
 - C#
   1. C# uses null and it is the defualt value for refrence types. Can be used for value types if an optional is used on the type.
   2. C# has null exeptions 
 - C++
   1. Uses NULL which evaluates to 0 or a null pointer value
### Errors and exception handling
 - C#
   1. Errors are handled using a try catch clause with an error causing the program to look for a catch clause. Errors must be represented by an instance class.
 - C++
   1. Errors are handled manualy though a try catch clause with a exeption object used as an operand
### Lambda expressions, closures, or functions as types
 - C#
   1. Lambda expressions use a =>
        ```antlr
        x => x * x
        ```
        means x is x squared
   2. C# uses delegates to pass functions as types wich allows you to pass a function as a parameter.
 - C++
   1. C++ does have lambda expressions written like
        ```antlr
        [](int x, int y)
        ```
### Implementation of listeners and event handlers
 - C#
   1. 
### Singleton
 - C#
   1. Singletons are implimented via a [pattern](http://csharpindepth.com/Articles/General/Singleton.aspx)
    
    ```antlr   
   public sealed class Singleton
    {
    private static Singleton instance = null;
    private static readonly object padlock = new object();

    Singleton()
    {
    }

        public static Singleton Instance
        {
            get
            {
                lock (padlock)
                {
                    if (instance == null)
                    {
                        instance = new Singleton();
                    }
                    return instance;
                }
            }
        }
    } 
    ```

Which is thread safe

   2. There is also a pattern for lazy [implimentation](http://csharpindepth.com/Articles/General/Singleton.aspx)
   
    ```antlr
    public sealed class Singleton
    {
        private static readonly Lazy<Singleton> lazy =
            new Lazy<Singleton>(() => new Singleton());
    
        public static Singleton Instance { get { return lazy.Value; } }

        private Singleton()
        {
        }
    } 
    ``` 
 - C++
   1. Singletons can be implimented using a [pattern](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1008019/c-singleton-design-pattern/1008289#1008289) C++11 automaticly makes it thread safe.
    ```antlr
      class S
    {
       public:
           static S& getInstance()
           {
               static S    instance; 
               return instance;
            }
       private:
            S() {} 
            S(S const&); 
           void operator=(S const&);
        public:
            S(S const&)               = delete;
            void operator=(S const&)  = delete;
    };
    ```
    
### Procedural programming 
 - C#
   1 focused more one oop paragram and shows much less influence of procedural compared to C++
 - C++
   1. originally designed to be able to code like C in addition to oop so it still is able to code this way and shows influince from it.
   2. Considered a procedural language
### Functional programming 
 - C#
   1. has implimented things like passing higher order functions, generics, and anynomous types
   2. Rather imperative and too mutable in its data to be pure
   3. sometimes considered an impure functional language
 - C++
   1. addes some features of Functional programming style such as constructs
   2. still lacks inherite lazy and pure features of pure functional languages
   3. sometimes considered impure functional language
### Multithreading
 - C#
   1. C# has threads wich is how multitasking is acomplished. by creating multiple threads it allows the programmer to run things in parallel
 - C++
   1. C++ uses multithreading to accomplish miltitasking
